docs/customization/python_class.md, before:

# Customizing through a python class

The basic steps are:

1. Inheriting from `BaseCommitizen`.
2. Give a name to your rules.
3. Create a Python package using proper [build backend](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Build-Backend)
4. Expose the class as a `commitizen.plugin` entrypoint.

Check an [example][convcomms] on how to configure `BaseCommitizen`.

You can also automate the steps above through [cookiecutter](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/1.7.0/).

```sh
cookiecutter gh:commitizen-tools/commitizen_cz_template
```

See [commitizen_cz_template](https://github.com/commitizen-tools/commitizen_cz_template) for details.

See [Third-party plugins](../third-party-plugins/about.md) for more details on how to create a third-party Commitizen plugin.

## Custom commit rules

Create a Python module, for example `cz_jira.py`.

Inherit from `BaseCommitizen`, and you must define `questions` and `message`. The others are optional.

```python title="cz_jira.py"
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen
from commitizen.defaults import Questions


class JiraCz(BaseCommitizen):
    # Questions = Iterable[MutableMapping[str, Any]]
    # It expects a list with dictionaries.
    def questions(self) -> Questions:
        """Questions regarding the commit message."""
        questions = [
            {"type": "input", "name": "title", "message": "Commit title"},
            {"type": "input", "name": "issue", "message": "Jira Issue number:"},
        ]
        return questions

    def message(self, answers: dict) -> str:
        """Generate the message with the given answers."""
        return f"answers['title'] (#answers['issue'])"

    def example(self) -> str:
        """Provide an example to help understand the style (OPTIONAL)

        Used by `cz example`.
        """
        return "Problem with user (#321)"

    def schema(self) -> str:
        """Show the schema used (OPTIONAL)

        Used by `cz schema`.
        """
        return "<title> (<issue>)"

    def info(self) -> str:
        """Explanation of the commit rules. (OPTIONAL)

        Used by `cz info`.
        """
        return "We use this because is useful"
```

The next file required is `setup.py` modified from flask version.

```python title="setup.py"
from setuptools import setup

setup(
    name="JiraCommitizen",
    version="0.1.0",
    py_modules=["cz_jira"],
    license="MIT",
    long_description="this is a long description",
    install_requires=["commitizen"],
    entry_points={"commitizen.plugin": ["cz_jira = cz_jira:JiraCz"]},
)
```

So in the end, we would have

    .
    ├── cz_jira.py
    └── setup.py

And that's it. You can install it without uploading to PyPI by simply
doing `pip install .`

## Custom bump rules

You need to define 2 parameters inside your custom `BaseCommitizen`.

| Parameter      | Type   | Default | Description                                                                                           |
| -------------- | ------ | ------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `bump_pattern` | `str`  | `None`  | Regex to extract information from commit (subject and body)                                           |
| `bump_map`     | `dict` | `None`  | Dictionary mapping the extracted information to a `SemVer` increment type (`MAJOR`, `MINOR`, `PATCH`) |

Let's see an example.

```python title="cz_strange.py"
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen


class StrangeCommitizen(BaseCommitizen):
    bump_pattern = r"^(break|new|fix|hotfix)"
    bump_map = {"break": "MAJOR", "new": "MINOR", "fix": "PATCH", "hotfix": "PATCH"}
```

That's it, your Commitizen now supports custom rules, and you can run.

```bash
cz -n cz_strange bump
```

[convcomms]: https://github.com/commitizen-tools/commitizen/blob/master/commitizen/cz/conventional_commits/conventional_commits.py

### Custom commit validation and error message

The commit message validation can be customized by overriding the `validate_commit_message` and `format_error_message`
methods from `BaseCommitizen`. This allows for a more detailed feedback to the user where the error originates from.

```python
import re
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen, ValidationResult
from commitizen import git


class CustomValidationCz(BaseCommitizen):
    def validate_commit_message(
        self,
        *,
        commit_msg: str,
        pattern: str | None,
        allow_abort: bool,
        allowed_prefixes: list[str],
        max_msg_length: int,
    ) -> ValidationResult:
        """Validate commit message against the pattern."""
        if not commit_msg:
            return allow_abort, [] if allow_abort else [f"commit message is empty"]
        if pattern is None:
            return True, []
        if any(map(commit_msg.startswith, allowed_prefixes)):
            return True, []
        if max_msg_length:
            msg_len = len(commit_msg.partition("\n")[0].strip())
            if msg_len > max_msg_length:
                return False, [
                    f"commit message is too long. Max length is {max_msg_length}"
                ]
        pattern_match = re.match(pattern, commit_msg)
        if pattern_match:
            return True, []
        else:
            # Perform additional validation of the commit message format
            # and add custom error messages as needed
            return False, ["commit message does not match the pattern"]

    def format_exception_message(
        self, ill_formatted_commits: list[tuple[git.GitCommit, list]]
    ) -> str:
        """Format commit errors."""
        displayed_msgs_content = "\n".join(
            (
                f'commit "{commit.rev}": "{commit.message}"'
                f"errors:\n"
                "\n".join((f"- {error}" for error in errors))
            )
            for commit, errors in ill_formatted_commits
        )
        return (
            "commit validation: failed!\n"
            "please enter a commit message in the commitizen format.\n"
            f"{displayed_msgs_content}\n"
            f"pattern: {self.schema_pattern()}"
        )
```

## Custom changelog generator

The changelog generator should just work in a very basic manner without touching anything.
You can customize it of course, and the following variables are the ones you need to add to your custom `BaseCommitizen`.

| Parameter                        | Type                                                                     | Required | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| -------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `commit_parser`                  | `str`                                                                    | NO       | Regex which should provide the variables explained in the [changelog description][changelog-des]                                                                                                                    |
| `changelog_pattern`              | `str`                                                                    | NO       | Regex to validate the commits, this is useful to skip commits that don't meet your ruling standards like a Merge. Usually the same as bump_pattern                                                                  |
| `change_type_map`                | `dict`                                                                   | NO       | Convert the title of the change type that will appear in the changelog, if a value is not found, the original will be provided                                                                                      |
| `changelog_message_builder_hook` | `method: (dict, git.GitCommit) -> dict | list | None`                  | NO       | Customize with extra information your message output, like adding links, this function is executed per parsed commit. Each GitCommit contains the following attrs: `rev`, `title`, `body`, `author`, `author_email`. Returning a falsy value ignore the commit. |
| `changelog_hook`                 | `method: (full_changelog: str, partial_changelog: Optional[str]) -> str` | NO       | Receives the whole and partial (if used incremental) changelog. Useful to send slack messages or notify a compliance department. Must return the full_changelog                                                     |
| `changelog_release_hook` | `method: (release: dict, tag: git.GitTag) -> dict` | NO | Receives each generated changelog release and its associated tag. Useful to enrich releases before they are rendered. Must return the update release

```python title="cz_strange.py"
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen
import chat
import compliance


class StrangeCommitizen(BaseCommitizen):
    changelog_pattern = r"^(break|new|fix|hotfix)"
    commit_parser = r"^(?P<change_type>feat|fix|refactor|perf|BREAKING CHANGE)(?:\((?P<scope>[^()\r\n]*)\)|\()?(?P<breaking>!)?:\s(?P<message>.*)?"
    change_type_map = {
        "feat": "Features",
        "fix": "Bug Fixes",
        "refactor": "Code Refactor",
        "perf": "Performance improvements",
    }

    def changelog_message_builder_hook(
        self, parsed_message: dict, commit: git.GitCommit
    ) -> dict | list | None:
        rev = commit.rev
        m = parsed_message["message"]
        parsed_message[
            "message"
        ] = f"{m} {rev} [{commit.author}]({commit.author_email})"
        return parsed_message

    def changelog_release_hook(self, release: dict, tag: git.GitTag) -> dict:
        release["author"] = tag.author
        return release

    def changelog_hook(
        self, full_changelog: str, partial_changelog: Optional[str]
    ) -> str:
        """Executed at the end of the changelog generation

        full_changelog: it's the output about to being written into the file
        partial_changelog: it's the new stuff, this is useful to send slack messages or
                           similar

        Return:
            the new updated full_changelog
        """
        if partial_changelog:
            chat.room("#committers").notify(partial_changelog)
        if full_changelog:
            compliance.send(full_changelog)
        full_changelog.replace(" fix ", " **fix** ")
        return full_changelog
```

## Raise Customize Exception

If you want `commitizen` to catch your exception and print the message, you'll have to inherit `CzException`.

```python
from commitizen.cz.exception import CzException


class NoSubjectProvidedException(CzException):
    ...
```

## Migrating from legacy plugin format

Commitizen migrated to a new plugin format relying on `importlib.metadata.EntryPoint`.
Migration should be straight-forward for legacy plugins:

- Remove the `discover_this` line from your plugin module
- Expose the plugin class under as a `commitizen.plugin` entrypoint.

The name of the plugin is now determined by the name of the entrypoint.

### Example

If you were having a `CzPlugin` class in a `cz_plugin.py` module like this:

```python
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen


class PluginCz(BaseCommitizen):
    ...


discover_this = PluginCz
```

Then remove the `discover_this` line:

```python
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen


class PluginCz(BaseCommitizen):
    ...
```

and expose the class as entrypoint in your `setuptools`:

```python
from setuptools import setup

setup(
    name="MyPlugin",
    version="0.1.0",
    py_modules=["cz_plugin"],
    entry_points={"commitizen.plugin": ["plugin = cz_plugin:PluginCz"]},
    ...,
)
```

Then your plugin will be available under the name `plugin`.

Commit message:

docs: add guidelines regarding how to test plugins
Signed-off-by: HollowTest <j88437182@gmail.com>

docs/customization/python_class.md, after:

# Customizing through a python class

The basic steps are:

1. Inheriting from `BaseCommitizen`.
2. Give a name to your rules.
3. Create a Python package using proper [build backend](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Build-Backend)
4. Expose the class as a `commitizen.plugin` entrypoint.

Check an [example][convcomms] on how to configure `BaseCommitizen`.

You can also automate the steps above through [cookiecutter](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/1.7.0/).

```sh
cookiecutter gh:commitizen-tools/commitizen_cz_template
```

See [commitizen_cz_template](https://github.com/commitizen-tools/commitizen_cz_template) for details.

See [Third-party plugins](../third-party-plugins/about.md) for more details on how to create a third-party Commitizen plugin.

## Custom commit rules

Create a Python module, for example `cz_jira.py`.

Inherit from `BaseCommitizen`, and you must define `questions` and `message`. The others are optional.

```python title="cz_jira.py"
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen
from commitizen.defaults import Questions


class JiraCz(BaseCommitizen):
    # Questions = Iterable[MutableMapping[str, Any]]
    # It expects a list with dictionaries.
    def questions(self) -> Questions:
        """Questions regarding the commit message."""
        questions = [
            {"type": "input", "name": "title", "message": "Commit title"},
            {"type": "input", "name": "issue", "message": "Jira Issue number:"},
        ]
        return questions

    def message(self, answers: dict) -> str:
        """Generate the message with the given answers."""
        return f"answers['title'] (#answers['issue'])"

    def example(self) -> str:
        """Provide an example to help understand the style (OPTIONAL)

        Used by `cz example`.
        """
        return "Problem with user (#321)"

    def schema(self) -> str:
        """Show the schema used (OPTIONAL)

        Used by `cz schema`.
        """
        return "<title> (<issue>)"

    def info(self) -> str:
        """Explanation of the commit rules. (OPTIONAL)

        Used by `cz info`.
        """
        return "We use this because is useful"
```

The next file required is `setup.py` modified from flask version.

```python title="setup.py"
from setuptools import setup

setup(
    name="JiraCommitizen",
    version="0.1.0",
    py_modules=["cz_jira"],
    license="MIT",
    long_description="this is a long description",
    install_requires=["commitizen"],
    entry_points={"commitizen.plugin": ["cz_jira = cz_jira:JiraCz"]},
)
```

So in the end, we would have

    .
    ├── cz_jira.py
    └── setup.py

And that's it. You can install it without uploading to PyPI by simply
doing `pip install .`

## Custom bump rules

You need to define 2 parameters inside your custom `BaseCommitizen`.

| Parameter      | Type   | Default | Description                                                                                           |
| -------------- | ------ | ------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `bump_pattern` | `str`  | `None`  | Regex to extract information from commit (subject and body)                                           |
| `bump_map`     | `dict` | `None`  | Dictionary mapping the extracted information to a `SemVer` increment type (`MAJOR`, `MINOR`, `PATCH`) |

Let's see an example.

```python title="cz_strange.py"
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen


class StrangeCommitizen(BaseCommitizen):
    bump_pattern = r"^(break|new|fix|hotfix)"
    bump_map = {"break": "MAJOR", "new": "MINOR", "fix": "PATCH", "hotfix": "PATCH"}
```

That's it, your Commitizen now supports custom rules, and you can run.

```bash
cz -n cz_strange bump
```

[convcomms]: https://github.com/commitizen-tools/commitizen/blob/master/commitizen/cz/conventional_commits/conventional_commits.py

### Custom commit validation and error message

The commit message validation can be customized by overriding the `validate_commit_message` and `format_error_message`
methods from `BaseCommitizen`. This allows for a more detailed feedback to the user where the error originates from.

```python
import re
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen, ValidationResult
from commitizen import git


class CustomValidationCz(BaseCommitizen):
    def validate_commit_message(
        self,
        *,
        commit_msg: str,
        pattern: str | None,
        allow_abort: bool,
        allowed_prefixes: list[str],
        max_msg_length: int,
    ) -> ValidationResult:
        """Validate commit message against the pattern."""
        if not commit_msg:
            return allow_abort, [] if allow_abort else [f"commit message is empty"]
        if pattern is None:
            return True, []
        if any(map(commit_msg.startswith, allowed_prefixes)):
            return True, []
        if max_msg_length:
            msg_len = len(commit_msg.partition("\n")[0].strip())
            if msg_len > max_msg_length:
                return False, [
                    f"commit message is too long. Max length is {max_msg_length}"
                ]
        pattern_match = re.match(pattern, commit_msg)
        if pattern_match:
            return True, []
        else:
            # Perform additional validation of the commit message format
            # and add custom error messages as needed
            return False, ["commit message does not match the pattern"]

    def format_exception_message(
        self, ill_formatted_commits: list[tuple[git.GitCommit, list]]
    ) -> str:
        """Format commit errors."""
        displayed_msgs_content = "\n".join(
            (
                f'commit "{commit.rev}": "{commit.message}"'
                f"errors:\n"
                "\n".join((f"- {error}" for error in errors))
            )
            for commit, errors in ill_formatted_commits
        )
        return (
            "commit validation: failed!\n"
            "please enter a commit message in the commitizen format.\n"
            f"{displayed_msgs_content}\n"
            f"pattern: {self.schema_pattern()}"
        )
```

## Custom changelog generator

The changelog generator should just work in a very basic manner without touching anything.
You can customize it of course, and the following variables are the ones you need to add to your custom `BaseCommitizen`.

| Parameter                        | Type                                                                     | Required | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| -------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `commit_parser`                  | `str`                                                                    | NO       | Regex which should provide the variables explained in the [changelog description][changelog-des]                                                                                                                    |
| `changelog_pattern`              | `str`                                                                    | NO       | Regex to validate the commits, this is useful to skip commits that don't meet your ruling standards like a Merge. Usually the same as bump_pattern                                                                  |
| `change_type_map`                | `dict`                                                                   | NO       | Convert the title of the change type that will appear in the changelog, if a value is not found, the original will be provided                                                                                      |
| `changelog_message_builder_hook` | `method: (dict, git.GitCommit) -> dict | list | None`                  | NO       | Customize with extra information your message output, like adding links, this function is executed per parsed commit. Each GitCommit contains the following attrs: `rev`, `title`, `body`, `author`, `author_email`. Returning a falsy value ignore the commit. |
| `changelog_hook`                 | `method: (full_changelog: str, partial_changelog: Optional[str]) -> str` | NO       | Receives the whole and partial (if used incremental) changelog. Useful to send slack messages or notify a compliance department. Must return the full_changelog                                                     |
| `changelog_release_hook` | `method: (release: dict, tag: git.GitTag) -> dict` | NO | Receives each generated changelog release and its associated tag. Useful to enrich releases before they are rendered. Must return the update release

```python title="cz_strange.py"
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen
import chat
import compliance


class StrangeCommitizen(BaseCommitizen):
    changelog_pattern = r"^(break|new|fix|hotfix)"
    commit_parser = r"^(?P<change_type>feat|fix|refactor|perf|BREAKING CHANGE)(?:\((?P<scope>[^()\r\n]*)\)|\()?(?P<breaking>!)?:\s(?P<message>.*)?"
    change_type_map = {
        "feat": "Features",
        "fix": "Bug Fixes",
        "refactor": "Code Refactor",
        "perf": "Performance improvements",
    }

    def changelog_message_builder_hook(
        self, parsed_message: dict, commit: git.GitCommit
    ) -> dict | list | None:
        rev = commit.rev
        m = parsed_message["message"]
        parsed_message[
            "message"
        ] = f"{m} {rev} [{commit.author}]({commit.author_email})"
        return parsed_message

    def changelog_release_hook(self, release: dict, tag: git.GitTag) -> dict:
        release["author"] = tag.author
        return release

    def changelog_hook(
        self, full_changelog: str, partial_changelog: Optional[str]
    ) -> str:
        """Executed at the end of the changelog generation

        full_changelog: it's the output about to being written into the file
        partial_changelog: it's the new stuff, this is useful to send slack messages or
                           similar

        Return:
            the new updated full_changelog
        """
        if partial_changelog:
            chat.room("#committers").notify(partial_changelog)
        if full_changelog:
            compliance.send(full_changelog)
        full_changelog.replace(" fix ", " **fix** ")
        return full_changelog
```

## Raise Customize Exception

If you want `commitizen` to catch your exception and print the message, you'll have to inherit `CzException`.

```python
from commitizen.cz.exception import CzException


class NoSubjectProvidedException(CzException):
    ...
```
## Testing your plugin

Treat your plugin just like a normal Python package. You can test them using the public `BaseCommitizen` interface directly. You should get a very good coverage of your plugin without the need to touch a real git repository. The tests in this repositories are already good references if you want to check the examples of how Commitizen itself verifies the bump logic and changelog generations. You should find them under the `tests/` directory.

Some good references are:
- tests/test_conf.py
- tests/test_changelog*.py
- tests/test_cz_customize.py
- tests/commands/test_changelog_command.py
- tests/commands/test_check_command.py

For integration checks:
- If you want to verify CLI behavior, you can create a temporary git repository and run `cz -n <plugin> ... --dry-run` or `cz changelog --dry-run` and assert the output.
- If you want to ensure discovery via entrypoints, you can install your plugin in the test environment and call `from commitizen.cz import discover_plugins; discover_plugins()`.

## Migrating from legacy plugin format

Commitizen migrated to a new plugin format relying on `importlib.metadata.EntryPoint`.
Migration should be straight-forward for legacy plugins:

- Remove the `discover_this` line from your plugin module
- Expose the plugin class under as a `commitizen.plugin` entrypoint.

The name of the plugin is now determined by the name of the entrypoint.

### Example

If you were having a `CzPlugin` class in a `cz_plugin.py` module like this:

```python
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen


class PluginCz(BaseCommitizen):
    ...


discover_this = PluginCz
```

Then remove the `discover_this` line:

```python
from commitizen.cz.base import BaseCommitizen


class PluginCz(BaseCommitizen):
    ...
```

and expose the class as entrypoint in your `setuptools`:

```python
from setuptools import setup

setup(
    name="MyPlugin",
    version="0.1.0",
    py_modules=["cz_plugin"],
    entry_points={"commitizen.plugin": ["plugin = cz_plugin:PluginCz"]},
    ...,
)
```

Then your plugin will be available under the name `plugin`.
